---
title: This Week's Program
message_id: <oghj00.22yguwpr4gz7h@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Nov 7 - Nov 11
===================================

I don't owe anyone an "open mind" or "hope".

I would have preferred to be writing something different in my
Tinyletter this week. I would have preferred a different subject
line.

My work is a retreat from this week's reality. I have that
privilege. I have the privilege of having a retreat at all. Many do
not, and I have little to offer them. Maybe some will read my code and
these notes and will learn and can better themselves in some way. Just
as others' code and notes helped me learn. I can hope for that.

My code this week revolved mostly around weaponry for the game, which
now feels in poor taste.

Here's the work.

## [4215c5c94565efb245da08eb2a7ce9c5d2b3042c][weapons]

I write out a bit more types for the `Weapons` module. This feels
emergent, and as I read through the Necromunda rulebook and attempt to
translate it to Elm, I frequently change my mind about how something
should be modeled.

## [ac7db0c6438b08d597f16e7a5bf81cead20b1aae][either]

I bring in a new module:
[`toastal/either`](http://package.elm-lang.org/packages/toastal/either/latest). The
`Either` type is pretty common in functional languages. The `strength`
of a Weapon can be either a fixed value or a modifier of its wielder's
strength. The `Either` type lets us encapsulate this for both cases.

## [f9216cc058041849e0545b0831d50696006b5e97][guns]

I make guns.

## [7735a65cae44e69cfb8673b6c8f0274fa03d33e2][equip]

A `Model` can `equip` a `Weapon`. Weapons have a `cost` associated
with them, but I'm ignoring that for now, and make sure that my
`Model` generator equips a pistol and a gun.

## [ad590878203cb41b515a007cefb6abf1a90efc26][shoot]

I parameterize the `Shoot` `Action` with the `Weapon` that will do the
shooting.

## [e3b0be2541c482d225ad9433fe2afde70332a502][equipment]

For every weapon equipped by a `fighter`, I render a new `Shoot` view
to tie up the work from the previous commit.

## [6d24d3664cb2acec64aeac7a446dc983a15230a7][advancement]

I create a little button and a new `Msg`: `Advance`. When I click the
button, the turn advances to the next phase. If a Player doesn't want
to move or shoot, they can elect to advance to the following phase.

## [a042bd9126bb52dd0d1c48a64a3b74fd6b304913][pivot]

How or what a fighter can shoot depends on what direction it is
facing, so I have to update the `Model` to encapsulate what direction
it's facing. On `Hover`, I do some math to update the `bearing` of the
fighter to track where the mouse is moving. I'm not sure if _bearing_
is the right word for this concept but it seemed appropriate. I add a
few helpers: `Tabletop.angle` calculates the angle in degrees between
two points (I am so bad at math this took me forever to figure
out). `Player.updateSelectedGangMember` well apply a transformation to
a Player's selected model. A `Model` can pivot even if it has used up
its movement. In the next commit, I restrict this to be able to happen
only in the `Movement` phase.

Stay safe.<br />
– Mark

[weapons]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/4215c5c94565efb245da08eb2a7ce9c5d2b3042c

[either]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/ac7db0c6438b08d597f16e7a5bf81cead20b1aae

[guns]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/f9216cc058041849e0545b0831d50696006b5e97

[equip]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/7735a65cae44e69cfb8673b6c8f0274fa03d33e2

[shoot]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/ad590878203cb41b515a007cefb6abf1a90efc26

[equipment]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/e3b0be2541c482d225ad9433fe2afde70332a502

[advancement]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/6d24d3664cb2acec64aeac7a446dc983a15230a7

[pivot]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/a042bd9126bb52dd0d1c48a64a3b74fd6b304913
