---
title: The Programs of the Week We Were Covered in a Heat Dome
message_id: <oaq1q8.1bbh72qn313ks@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: July 18 - July 22
======================================

Stay cool out there friends. Make sure to stay hydrated on your
Pokéwalks.

## [ab426b18ef39f45e52e8aa21488d533f0075ecc3][song-data]

Feels so good to be back in **Clojure**! Here, at the end of the
`gen-song` function, I do some `core.async` acrobatics so that the
returning channel now returns a map of a bunch of the data used to
generate the song.

## [0be52164506f1919125517ceb090d35403cfd492][recording-macro-pair]

In the `make-recording` macro, I now return a pair: the path to the
recorded wav file, and that song data pulled out from the
channel. Then, in my `upload-to-s3` function, I merge the song data
with some previous stuff and use that as the metadata for the s3
object. Now the s3 object knows everything about its own generation.

I also throw in a try/catch block — my first time using this with
Clojure. If for whatever reason I get an error from the Forecast API,
I log the error and continue song generation.

I tried shuffling logging functions around, but reverted that work.

## [b4b433c6d3404365f634d33d92b3ba91847ab171][codedeploy-hook]

I make sure that my CloudFormation Custom Resource that I use to
establish the GitHub hook uses the _deployment_ event, to ensure that
auto-deployment works.

## [8527521a929a2f0fbf70d4426d777c4deda348db][main-arg]

I make it so that the first arg I pass to the main function is
threaded through the application. This will be the s3 bucket for
uploading songs.

## [cfc2e859a91b81dc45cfc4537181bea88caf8ab9][retain]

I make sure that when I do a CloudFormation delete, it retains the s3
bucket using the
[`DeletionPolicy`](http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-attribute-deletionpolicy.html)
attribute. There might be songs in there!

## [536b2fabf6da85a61c36851dae29ea060655f68e][resource-id]

After creating the GitHub hook, I use its URL for CloudFormation's
resource ID attribute.

## [96ce7f68bf3322d2bae35a18d6fc4988ab855fa2][delete-hook]

Now that I retain the hook URL as a CloudFormation resource, I can use
that URL to issue a `DELETE` call to the GitHub API to clean up the
hook when I delete the stack.

## [41eece52a18cc3d2839e220ae6a292840c8ee5c5][forecast-param]

I ask for the Forecast API key in the params for CloudFormation.

More here to come. Still uncommitted: my experiments with cron. Next
week, I'll finish those experiments and have songs being generated on
the regular. I have some more tweaks I want to make on the application
and then comes what I anticipate will be quite challenging: getting
those songs out from the s3 bucket and onto social media.

💦 Mark

[song-data]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/ab426b18ef39f45e52e8aa21488d533f0075ecc3

[recording-macro-pair]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/0be52164506f1919125517ceb090d35403cfd492

[codedeploy-hook]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/b4b433c6d3404365f634d33d92b3ba91847ab171

[main-arg]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/8527521a929a2f0fbf70d4426d777c4deda348db

[retain]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/cfc2e859a91b81dc45cfc4537181bea88caf8ab9

[resource-id]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/536b2fabf6da85a61c36851dae29ea060655f68e

[delete-hook]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/96ce7f68bf3322d2bae35a18d6fc4988ab855fa2

[forecast-param]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/41eece52a18cc3d2839e220ae6a292840c8ee5c5

