---
title: The Programs of the Week of Christmas & Hanukkah
message_id: <oinlxm.270enf6upkmyv@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Dec 19 - Dec 23
====================================

🎄 Merry Christmas and Happy Hanukkah! 🕎

On Monday I fiddled around and added
the [`restart-emacs`](https://melpa.org/#/restart-emacs) package to my
Emacs configuration. Then I spent the rest of the week effectively
beginning a rewrite on `hive-city`.

## [fa20151e243573eb732e123192fecbfd31a0f0b1][campaign]

I introduce the `Campaign` module. It's basically a new `Main`. I'm
going to start introducing functionality into it piece-by-piece, this
time built around my new `Game` module and two players.

## [956641e723ebb114486f7d3eccabdb0b8d4fe876][window]

One change with large ramifications is that I am now looking at both
the window width and height for my window size state. I want this pass
at Hive City to be fully responsive, and able to scale up and down to
whatever resolution.

## [bcab1bc12eb3ed96674e4e01fd4f681919540032][flexbox]

This commit adds two things. The first is I'm using Elm to actually
bring in a `style` block so that I can have some css (that works
nicely in Elm Reactor). The other is that I change the messaging and
control areas on the top and bottom of the screen to use flexbox. With
this and some new-found knowledge on
SVG's
[`preserveAspectRatio`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/SVG/Attribute/preserveAspectRatio) my
game always fits just right in the browser window.

## [42aa5b5d953472e897ea811f5cd18ee629df8f10][modelview]

I change the Model's `view` function to have a colored circle, which
makes for an easier click target.

## [21a749c146bc18ef73197d61856c3914adf4e949][selectfriendlymodel]

I add `Game.selectFriendlyModel`. This is the first step into trying
out how to do commands for the "active" player.

## [e84b1c3bfb2fcc22445a31f6d18f0643428c1b62][campaign-select]

I bring the `Select Model` `Msg` into `Campaign`, using that new
function. Player One is assumed to be the controlling player.

## [0e4420b446b9220b6f5a5627d21ebac88662e0b2][activeplayer]

Back in the `Game` module, I create a new union type:
`ActivePlayer`. The `ActivePlayer` can either be `PlayerOne` or
`PlayerTwo`. This is paired with the `Turn`. Based on what the
`ActivePlayer` of the `Turn` is, I can map over either player one or
player two. This is awesome, because now as the Turn advances to the
next player, they'll automatically be able to do those actions without
hardcoding "player 1" or "player 2" anywhere.

## [1efb4c548dddd487d2733e468c83aa27aa2389e9][hover]

The next action to come over from the old `Main` module is `Hover
Mouse.Position`. Using the new `activePlayer` functionality this is
straight forward. Because the game is now fully responsive, my
`tabletopPositionFromMousePosition` function gets a little bit more
complex, figuring out the dimensions of the game from the window and
aspect ratio of the table.

The next thing to come over is the `KeyPress` Msg.

## [77e855eb1980f563a39418ae1fd5d9012a9f8834][tallscreen]

When the screen is taller than it is wide, I need to make sure that I
update my positioning math. On a wide screen, the height of the game
is always 80% of the window, but it will scale to preserve the game's
aspect ratio.

## [b9c7f52d63c15a4f4ef3db252a4eb85376f9822b][click]

`Click` is the next Msg to be brought in, and once again the
`activePlayer` semantics make things just a bit simpler.

Was a fun week for refactoring and cleaning up some of
`hive-city`. It's a shame I'll be abandoning it soon, but hopefully
I'll have something worth showing and a thinkpiece worth writing.

I hope you enjoy your holidays and hold your family close, whether
they're blood relatives or others of significance or furry companions
or whoever.

May your days be merry and bright,<br />
🎁 Mark

🕯🕯🕯🕯🕯🕯🕯🕯

[campaign]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/fa20151e243573eb732e123192fecbfd31a0f0b1

[window]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/956641e723ebb114486f7d3eccabdb0b8d4fe876

[flexbox]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/bcab1bc12eb3ed96674e4e01fd4f681919540032

[modelview]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/42aa5b5d953472e897ea811f5cd18ee629df8f10

[selectfriendlymodel]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/21a749c146bc18ef73197d61856c3914adf4e949

[campaign-select]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/e84b1c3bfb2fcc22445a31f6d18f0643428c1b62

[activeplayer]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/0e4420b446b9220b6f5a5627d21ebac88662e0b2

[hover]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/1efb4c548dddd487d2733e468c83aa27aa2389e9

[tallscreen]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/77e855eb1980f563a39418ae1fd5d9012a9f8834

[click]: https://github.com/mwunsch/hive-city/commit/b9c7f52d63c15a4f4ef3db252a4eb85376f9822b
