---
title: The Programs of the Week the Taxman Cometh
message_id: <o5ovcw.29k9akdi53k11@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Apr 11 - Apr 15
====================================

I've got some new subscribers (ðŸ‘‹) and you folks will want to read
[last week's entry](http://www.markwunsch.com/tinyletter/2016/04/panama_papers.html)
to catch up on what I've been working on.

Good. This week I had every intention of getting `sonic-sketches`
running in a production environment. I had no idea how much *eldritch
computing* I would end up doing.

## [9fb31f700ca7fbfa0bddf7bd8acaf4cb7f92bf88][clock-drums]

Innocuous enough. I set up the drummachine to use the core.async based
`clock-signal`. Big whoop.

## <span style="font-weight:normal;">ðŸ˜–</span>

Things took a turn here and it's not really reflected in the code at
all. There's a commit where I fix a typo but that's the only artifact
of a bunch of work chasing down how exactly I'll run this thing *in
the cloud*.

I had in my head it would be neat to try out
[AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/) for this. This is just a
simple command-line program that generates a song and uploads it to
S3. I start digging into running Clojure on Lambda. It's
[certainly possible](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/compute/clojure/). I'm
not familiar at all with Lambda so it looks like you just need
yourself a `-handler` function and you're set. I read up and track
down some libraries that show off better ways of dealing with
processing AWS events in Clojure and I keep seeing people say things
along the lines of "that increased start-up time to get Clojure
running on the JVM tho" and I thought what's the big deal? Only then
did I realize that Lambda charges based on how many milliseconds your
program runs. This is a dealbreaker because my program has to start up
Overtone and then **play a song**. Lambda isn't going to work.

After that exploration (which kind of took the better part of an
afternoon), it became clear that I would need a real server to run
this on. Time to get `sonic-sketches` running on Linuxâ€¦

The first thing I try to do is figure out how to package my program up
in an *uberjar* â€” a big package wrapping up both my program and its
dependencies. This doesn't work. I do a whole lot of reading about
[AOT compilation](http://clojure.org/reference/compilation) in Clojure
and Lein and tweak my `project.clj` in all kinds of subtle and
repetitive ways. Something about how Overtone uses native libraries to
link to SuperCollider. For those who are interested in this journey
this discussion on
[overtone#140](https://github.com/overtone/overtone/issues/140) did
manage to help out, involving compiling the uberjar without AOT and
then compiling the main class and adding that to the jar later. *That*
worked, but my goodness that's convoluted. I resolved that I would
just have my source code on the box and `lein trampoline run` because
that works reliably. The uberjar exploration took the better part of a
morning.

I was going to use HashiCorp's newer
[Otto](https://www.ottoproject.io/) project to manage my development
and deployment. Love those HashiCorp folks, they have so many cool tools!

Otto doesn't have a supported
["app type"](https://www.ottoproject.io/docs/apps/index.html) for
Clojure so I went with "custom" which is meant to point to a
[Vagrantfile](https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/vagrantfile/). This
wasn't working until I found
[otto#158](https://github.com/hashicorp/otto/issues/158) which points
out a schema change not reflected in the documentation.

## [1a03673bc453d5e57724cde6ef8aed68e8bcc3e5][hcl-mode]

Adds a major mode to my Emacs config for working with the
[HashiCorp Configuration Language](https://github.com/hashicorp/hcl).

## [607afce251df3252e9c7761fc1fc7a5beeaa5f47][otto]

Adds an Otto Appfile and Vagrantfile to the project.

Running `otto dev` does not sync my project to the `vagrant` directory
on the virtual machine which is what I've come to expect with
Vagrant. Otto does not treat the Vagrantfile as a "templatized file"
as it claims to do in the documentation. I punt on Otto and decide
I'll just stick with Vagrant for now.

## [dabb87a13fb5bfcc05f3f15d117eabff95a2071f][vagrant]

I set up my Vagrant box to use
[hashicorp/precise64](https://atlas.hashicorp.com/hashicorp/boxes/precise64)
because that's what it uses in all of the documentation and I'd prefer
to stay far away from anything that would push me to have an opinion
about Linux distros. I have no opinion on Linux distros and I'd like
to keep it that way (Arch seems prtty cool tho). I provision the box
to have [OpenJDK 7](http://openjdk.java.net/) (I guess Precise
Pangolin doesn't care too much for Java 8) and download lein onto the
box. Cool I have a Clojure environment now.

`lein run` doesn't work in my Vagrant
environment. Unsurprising. Something about those native libs and
`jack`.

## <span style="font-weight:normal;">ðŸ˜±</span>

I then decide I'm going to try to set up my virtual machine to support
audio. I thought ðŸ’­ "Heck I'm making audio I might as well ensure that I
can hear the thing this machine is doing how else will I know if it
works?" I don't know why I thought this but I explored it and my god
it just about did me in.

First of all I had to have Vagrant make sure that VirtualBox knew that
this machine needed to support audio. After some googling and
documentation reading, I found this handy bit of Vagrant
configuration:

      config.vm.provider "virtualbox" do |vb|
        vb.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--audio", "coreaudio", "--audiocontroller", "ac97"]
      end

This allows VirtualBox to emulate a soundcard on the virtual machine
and route it into Apple's coreaudio. I think that's what this does, at
least.

Then, I start searching for ways to play a sound from within the
Vagrant machine. I read about two utilities: `aplay` and
`speaker-test`. Where do I get these utilities? I read on that these
are part of the `alsa-utils` package. ALSA is the
[Advanced Linux Sound Architecture][alsa]. Apparently it's used by
Linux to play sounds. There's also
[Open Sound System](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Open_Sound_System)
(or OSS) and
[PulseAudio](https://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/PulseAudio/). I
bring these up because when searching for "play audio on Ubuntu" all of
these topics appear and all of them are confusing and nothing makes
sense to me. All of these maybe conflict with each other (or don't)
but all of them will do something sinister to your system that forces
you to dive into system configuration files as root to untangle. **I
have no idea what I'm doing.**

    aplay -l

Shows that I have no sound card.

    sudo aplay -l

Oh actually I do have sound cards. I have to add the vagrant user to
the `audio` group. Cool. No sound plays. Oh, apparently there's an
`alsa-mixer` that controls system mixing and volume. I just need to
turn the volume up! `alsa-mixer` is a curses program. I have no idea
what I'm doing. I google around and learn that even though I thought I
turned the volume up, the channels were still muted. What channels
need to be turned up and unmuted? I'm googling and googling and
googling and I have so many tabs open and I need to use the `ac97`
audio controller in VirtualBox and `amixer` allows you to control
volume without the curses interface and _finally_â€¦

## [fbef7f98ff4210d3c0a9a85aba9d3889478fb978][amixer]

_Finally_ I am able to play a wav file with `aplay` in my Vagrant
machine that I can hear through the headphones plugged into my host
Macbook Pro.

It dawns on me now that I probably didn't need to do that. I'm
generating wav files why do I need to play them?

Also, `lein run` still doesn't work.

I guess I need to install the
[JACK Audio Connection Kit](http://jackaudio.org/) as mentioned in the
[Overtone wiki](https://github.com/overtone/overtone/wiki/Installing-and-starting-jack).

`jackd` won't start for a variety of reasons. Googling and trials and
errors continue.

    export DBUS_SESSION_BUS_ADDRESS=unix:path=/run/dbus/system_bus_socket

This is because jackd thinks it needs X11 to run. I have no idea what
the above environment variable is doing but it does something. There's
something wrong with the "security policies in the configuration file"
and adding

    <policy group="audio">
      <allow own="org.freedesktop.ReserveDevice1.Audio0"/>
    </policy>

to the `/etc/dbus-1/system.d` configs at last results in jackd
starting. I have no idea what I'm doing.

I `vagrant destroy` and `vagrant up` in a loop over and over because I
keep stopping daemons that shouldn't have been stopped. I can't
`apt-get install jackd2` in my Vagrantfile provisioning because this
big curses dialog box opens up in the middle of installation asking me
something about a realtime kernel and that makes the output totally
wack.

## [311e6274968f0c90480bbdda7c4a47c3a7fdb00b][jackd]

`lein run` still doesn't work. I create a separate Overtone project
from scratch to see what I can get to work inside a REPL.

    SEVERE: Unable to load native libs c and scsynth. Please try an
    external server with (use 'overtone.core)

Severe.

    user=> (boot-external-server)
    --> Booting external SuperCollider server...
    --> Connecting to external SuperCollider server: 127.0.0.1:16931
    Exception in thread "Thread-10" java.io.IOException: Cannot run
    program "scsynth" (in directory "."): error=2, No such file or
    directory

This is where I am now. I am determined to make this work. If you are
reading this and you have experience running Overtone or SuperCollider
on Linux please get at me. I am tempted to rack a Mac Mini somewhere
but I'd really rather not. I want to get my program to run in a Linux
environment so I can host it in the cloud to generate music. I want to
make a Vagrantfile (or a Dockerfile if it comes to that) for others to
use so that they can run Overtone projects in the cloud.

I have no idea what I'm doing.

I have no idea what I'm learning.

There's some kind of moral to this story or lesson to be learned but I
have no idea what that is.

ðŸ¤” Mark


[clock-drums]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/9fb31f700ca7fbfa0bddf7bd8acaf4cb7f92bf88

[hcl-mode]: https://github.com/mwunsch/emacs.d/commit/1a03673bc453d5e57724cde6ef8aed68e8bcc3e5

[otto]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/607afce251df3252e9c7761fc1fc7a5beeaa5f47

[vagrant]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/dabb87a13fb5bfcc05f3f15d117eabff95a2071f

[alsa]: http://www.alsa-project.org/main/index.php/Main_Page

[amixer]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/fbef7f98ff4210d3c0a9a85aba9d3889478fb978

[jackd]: https://github.com/mwunsch/sonic-sketches/commit/311e6274968f0c90480bbdda7c4a47c3a7fdb00b

