---
title: Pumpkin Spice Programs
message_id: <oy50w4.a52813pp12f@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Oct 16 – Oct 20
====================================

Hi fam. I wrote some code this week. It was in Racket.

## Let's make an event loop!

Today I want to focus on a group of related commits, and talk you
through what I've done.

+ [16f501d15efef42ce01973c21fce1d162ff1cc67][rewrite]
+ [45531e1eaec8f690e89e43351941db4848e9ed6e][message-helpers]
+ [c9b07cb6caecd9b3e583cec6dc48c6770839e647][semaphore]
+ [d4702d9512284eb17816431096b7631b56df913d][place-wait]

In the first commit, I blow away nearly all of `overscan/main.rkt` and
start over again with my new `gstreamer` module in my quiver.

The first thing I want to figure out in this rewrite, before getting
all fancy, is to handle the messages that a pipeline emits through its
lifetime. Related to that is how to shutdown the pipeline cleanly when
there's an error or the stream has ended. I also want to be able to
incrementally add or take away things that can monitor the event bus,
like debugging and logging utilities.

I need an event loop!

### `make-bus-channel`

This function has existed for some time in different parts of the
Overscan codebase, and has been refined. It currently exists
in
[`gstreamer/bus.rkt`](https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/blob/master/gstreamer/bus.rkt).

    (define (make-bus-channel bus [filters '(any)]
                              #:timeout [timeout clock-time-none])
      (let* ([bus-pipe (spawn-bus-place)]
             [bus-dead? (place-dead-evt bus-pipe)])
        (place-channel-put bus-pipe (list (gtype-instance-pointer (gobject-ptr bus))
                                          timeout
                                          filters))
        (choice-evt (wrap-evt bus-pipe
                              (lambda (ptr) (and ptr (gstruct-cast ptr gst-message))))
                    (handle-evt bus-dead?
                                (lambda (ev) (wrap-evt ev (const (place-wait bus-pipe))))))))

`bus-pipe` here is the read end of a
Racket [_place_](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/places.html)
channel that receives the arguments necessary to poll
the
[`gst_bus_timed_pop_filtered`](https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/data/doc/gstreamer/head/gstreamer/html/GstBus.html#gst-bus-timed-pop-filtered) function.

The place forwards messages back to this pipe and terminates when the
last message is a `fatal-message?` — a message indicating that an
error or the end of the stream has been reached.

The return value of `make-bus-channel` is a `choice-evt`:
a
[_synchronizable event_](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/sync.html) whose
value is either a message coming from the pipe (or NULL depending on
the timeout set) or a `bus-dead?` event indicating that the place has
closed down. That last little `choice-evt` is kind of tricky
considering how much `wrap-evt` and `handle-evt` is sprinkled through
there, but looking at the contract for `make-bus-channel` helps
clarify:

    [make-bus-channel
     (->* ((gobject/c gst-bus))
          (message-type/c
           #:timeout clock-time?)
          (evt/c (or/c message?
                       false/c
                       (evt/c exact-integer?))))]

This says that `make-bus-channel` returns an event whose
_synchronization result_ is either a message, `#f` (representing
NULL), or another event with a synchronization result of the
_exit status_ of the `bus-pipe`.

To pull messages off the bus you continuously synchronize on it
(e.g. with [`sync`][sync] or its related functions) until you receive another
`evt` in which case the bus has been closed.

[sync]: https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/sync.html#%28def._%28%28quote._~23~25kernel%29._sync%29%29

### `spawn-bus-worker`

Back in `overscan/main.rkt` I build the _loop_ part of the _event
loop_. The `spawn-bus-worker` takes a GStreamer pipeline, and calls
`make-bus-channel` to get the emitter. Then, it spawns a new thread
and starts a loop. Each pass it calls `sync`, which will block
until something new is emitted from the bus.

    (define (spawn-bus-worker broadcast)
      (let* ([bus (send broadcast get-bus)]
             [chan (make-bus-channel bus)])
        (thread (thunk
                 (let loop ()
                   (let ([ev (sync chan)])
                     (if (evt? ev)
                         (semaphore-post broadcast-complete-evt)
                         (begin
                           (for ([proc (in-hash-values broadcast-listeners)])
                             (proc ev broadcast))
                           (loop)))))))))

When what comes over the bus is an `evt?`, I know from that
`make-bus-channel` contract that this means the bus has closed down;
my pipeline is done. I post to
a [`semaphore`](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/semaphore.html)
and exit the loop. The _semaphore_ is a little synchronization
mechanism that in this case indicates that the broadcast has
completed; I call this one the `broadcast-complete-evt`.

If anything else comes over the bus, I loop through a set of
listeners, and call each listener with whatever that other thing was
and the pipeline that emitted the thing. I know from the above
contract that this thing (called `ev` within this procedure) can only
be a `message?` or `#f`. Then I call another iteration of the
loop.

### `broadcast-listeners`

The group of listeners that are called with each pass of the loop are
stored in some global state called `broadcast-listeners`, which is
just a mutable hash. The keys are integers and the values are
procedures.

    (define broadcast-listeners
      (make-hash (list (cons 0 default-broadcast-listener))))

`default-broadcast-listener` is the bare minimum thing that has to
happen when a `fatal-message?` appears on the bus: set the pipeline
state to `'null`.

    (define (default-broadcast-listener msg broadcast)
      (when (fatal-message? msg)
        (send broadcast set-state 'null)))

#### `add-listener`

Adding a new listener to this stack is as easy as mutating the
`broadcast-listener` hash.

    (define (add-listener proc)
      (let* ([stack broadcast-listeners]
             [key (hash-count stack)])
        (hash-set! stack key proc)
        key))

The key is just the number of things in the hash. I can trust on all
the Racket contract stuff to make sure that the procedures always take
the right arguments.

That's my event loop. `make-bus-channel` sets up an event emitter for
a pipeline, `spawn-bus-handler` begins a loop to continuously read
from the emitter, and `broadcast-listeners` allows the end-user to
manage listeners for events as they come through.

### `stop`

Because Overscan is built for live streaming, the user has to
explicitly end the broadcast. They do this by calling `stop`.

    (define (stop #:timeout [timeout 5])
      (define broadcast (get-current-broadcast))
      (send broadcast send-event (make-eos-event))
      (if (sync/timeout timeout broadcast-complete-evt)
          (let-values ([(result current pending) (send broadcast get-state)])
            (set-box! current-broadcast #f)
            result)
          (error "Could not stop broadcast")))

`stop` pulls the current broadcast out of global state, sends it an
_EOS_ event, and then waits for the `broadcast-complete-evt` semaphore
to unblock. GStreamer internals handle propagating that event through
the pipeline. An _EOS_ message is eventually emitted from the bus and
it shuts down. Once that happens, the event loop posts to the
semaphore, this procedure resumes, and the global state can be reset.

That all feels pretty clean, and gives me some structure to do a lot
of different things with message handling.

So beyond working through this event stuff, this week I also started
writing documentation for the new-and-improved `gstreamer` module.

[Read the GStreamer documentation here.](http://www.markwunsch.com/overscan/gstreamer.html) More
to come over the next week!

Good concurrency and synchronization primitives are 😙👌.

👻 Mark

[rewrite]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/16f501d15efef42ce01973c21fce1d162ff1cc67

[message-helpers]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/45531e1eaec8f690e89e43351941db4848e9ed6e

[semaphore]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/c9b07cb6caecd9b3e583cec6dc48c6770839e647

[place-wait]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/d4702d9512284eb17816431096b7631b56df913d
