---
title: The Programs of the Week We Joined Mastodon
message_id: <oo1viy.2t28sfc9soh8i@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Apr 3 - Apr 7
==================================

My commits are dense and all over the place this week. Just as I hit
my stride in my GIR library, I hit a wall with how to represent
something in the API. I need the weekend to chew on a game plan.

Thankfully there's a nice distraction to be had
in [Mastodon](https://mastodon.social). The new federated social
network has captured the imagination of those of us who are more than
a little burnt on Twitter and more than a little interested in
networks built on standard protocols and technologies. I
am [**@mw@mastodon.social**](https://mastodon.social/@mw).

I find Mastodon fascinating, not so much because of its potential as a
Twitter escape hatch, but because the protocols that drive a federated
publication/syndication network are ripe for exploitation. Could you
make an experience like Snapchat Stories on the Mastodon/GNU Social
protocols? The potential for new experiences and interfaces is so
interesting. It reminds me of peak RSS or when I first discovered
tumblelogs. When I reach a conclusion with `overscan`, I'll be
eyeballing Mastodon for my next project.

Despite my fascination with Mastodon, I'm finding myself more and more
fatigued with social networking. There's been a downward trend in my
"engagement". My tweets aren't liked or RT'd. My subscription count is
stagnant if not down for this newsletter. Am I losing touch? Are
people just not into this whole Racket thing? What does my (tiny)
audience expect from me? What do you, dear reader, expect?

I hope you expect the _sickest_ code.

## [f1438547294b2dc41e7845e6a5c242921032d24f][gi-base]

I create a base struct `gi-base`, for all the other GObject
Introspection structs to inherit from. I'm trying to get my codebase
to be a better match to what GIR actually does. I also make it so that
when invoking a function returns a pointer, I cast it to another
pointer that represents a structure that can be introspected. This
way, I can call methods on GObject instances.

## [7e1a037439add2a1b453aae67808c09bc830f8eb][string->symbol]

I alter a handful of foreign function signatures to accept or return a
`_symbol` type. C represents these as Strings (`char *` more
precisely) but Racket will transform them into interned symbols.

## [725d6ee7f3e5c7fe06f3531fe4c014bf9387de8a][c-id]

At this point, I stumble across something in the Racket FFI docs that
show that I can actually alter the definition of some of these C
functions. So that:

    (define-gir g_base_info_get_name (_fun _gi-base-info -> _string))

Can be renamed in Racket but refer to the same function like so:

    (define-gir gi-base-name (_fun _gi-base-info -> _string)
      #:c-id g_base_info_get_name)

Before, I was creating my own Racket functions that just wrapped these
C functions. I don't need those wrappers at all! I'm really impressed
with the flexibility that Racket's FFI offers.

## [aadb78788439577bdef21b019a8cd266fa0c859a][make-gi-base]

This flexibility allows me to update the `_gi-base-info` base
type. Instead of just an empty pointer value, I can do some
intelligent conversions here. Now, whenever a C function returns a
`_gi-base-info` type, Racket will unwrap that pointer into the
appropriate struct.

Here's where the wheels fell off a little bit. Let's say I have a C
function that I've wrapped with GIR and it returns a pointer to a C
Struct. What do I unwrap that struct into? I know what fields that
struct has, what methods it can call, its name… I tried to make
a [new (Racket) struct type][make-struct-type] on the fly, but that's
not quite right. I think I have to turn to Macros here so that
whenever a Registered Type is introspected, it creates definitions for
instances of that type for Racket. Alternatively I can create a
`struct-instance` struct that holds the details, but that API is less
than ideal. It's driving me a bit mad.

Toot me on Mastodon if you have some thoughts or suggestions.

– Mark

[gi-base]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/f1438547294b2dc41e7845e6a5c242921032d24f

[string->symbol]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/7e1a037439add2a1b453aae67808c09bc830f8eb

[c-id]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/725d6ee7f3e5c7fe06f3531fe4c014bf9387de8a

[make-gi-base]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/aadb78788439577bdef21b019a8cd266fa0c859a

[make-struct-type]: https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/creatingmorestructs.html#%28def._%28%28quote._~23~25kernel%29._make-struct-type%29%29
