---
title: The Programs of a Week of #lang
message_id: <ou6i99.f6dsd7a5tn0d@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: July 31 - Aug 1
====================================

Hello there friends. Gonna be real with you. I did not do much coding
this week. I kind of phoned it in. A couple of commits adding Scribble
documentation, that's pretty much it. I did a lot of thinking
though. I looked at the Overscan codebase and I thought. I thought the
shape of it and what needed to be carved. There is one commit that is
pretty darn important.

## [6acbd6c3f91a1d9dfd3fb5c9deccb95d367a8c4d][hashlang]

Every `.rkt` file begins with a line that starts with:

    #lang

Racket is a laboratory for programming language research, and the
`#lang` line tells Racket what _language_ should be used to interpret
the file. When working with macros in Racket, you're working with
Racket's _expander_ layer. You're taking _syntax_ and manipulating it
to produce a _parse_ of the program. There is a layer before the
_expander_ layer called
the
[*reader*](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/reader.html). The
_reader_ is responsible for reading a character stream and
transforming it into _syntax_. The `#lang` directive is used to
determine how the source file is recognized at the _reader_ level.

In this commit, I transform Overscan from just some ol' Racket module
into a new language. That sounds like a lot, but it's actually pretty
simple.

In a new file, instead of doing something like:

    #lang racket
    (require overscan)

I now can do:

    #lang overscan

Practically, nothing else changes.

I'm adopting the same strategy used in
the [`#lang slideshow`][slideshow] library. When you declare a Racket
file to be in the Slideshow language, `slideshow` re-exports (almost)
all of `racket`
and [`pict`](https://docs.racket-lang.org/pict/index.html).

Here's some of the other things I thought about:

+ Documenting Introspection has showed how silly some of the
  assumptions of that library are. I need to rethink a few things
  here.
+ Continuing to build out the GStreamer library. Maybe even have it be
  Object Oriented and bring in `racket/class`.
+ Do some special stuff in Overscan w/r/t the "videobox" element. This
  is what's used in picture-in-picture. Would love to build out
  support to dynamically change the dimensions and positions of the
  box while broadcasting.

All of these thoughts. Gotta write the code!

🤔 Mark

[hashlang]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/6acbd6c3f91a1d9dfd3fb5c9deccb95d367a8c4d

[slideshow]: https://docs.racket-lang.org/slideshow/index.html
