---
title: The Programs of the First Week of October
message_id: <oxexzj.4vhrbt8ggdw8@markwunsch.com>
---

This Weak Program: Oct 2 - Oct 6
================================

Do you see it? This email's easter egg? It's my clever joke.

Oh hi friends thank you for reading about my esoteric program. Yes I'm
still working on it. This is the hardest side project in the world to
describe.

This week I continued to make progress on my Racket bindings for the
multimedia C framework that will power my live coding environment for
live streaming video. Cool, right? The coolest?

## [708d000d47a170587698132f8e3bc6705743d5c1][pipeline]

I continue my build-out of Racket classes that delegate to
GObjects. Here's `pipeline%`, which is the piece of the puzzle that
lets me finally actually make video.

## [12b0b1150879f77db81931407ed7ee4e40dcdd87][pipeline-compose]

Now that I'm pulling these pieces together in a cohesive manner, I can
do some patterns I didn't think about doing before, like wrapping
last week's `bin%-compose` in a `pipeline%`
object. `pipeline%-compose` let's me quickly create a GStreamer
pipeline.

So I can do something like this:

    (pipeline%-compose "borat-voice:my-pipes"
        (element-factory%-make "videotestsrc")
        (element-factory%-make "osxvideosink")

This makes a pipeline, and then I can play it! Simple as pie(-pline).

## [b1a4f8929ee6e8ec7b2ef42148d600647d952483][is-gtype]

I rename the introspection functions `is-a?` and `is-a?/c` to
`is-gtype?` and `is-gtype/c?`. The latter forms are more descriptive
about what's actually being checked and they don't conflict with
identifiers from `racket/class`. I think I might end up renaming or
removing a bunch of functionality in `ffi/unsafe/introspection` so
that there are no conflicts with `racket/class` at all. Now that I
have `gobject<%>`, I think I've done enough real-world programming to
show how the world of Racket OOP and GIR can coexist.

## [6d67c6fd2012a960af220c53c5c94cc4faf78c27][bus]

Everybody get on the `bus%`! Here I'm reworking how I can pull
messages from a pipeline off a FIFO queue. 🚌

## [1871749bee5035dbf43f751bf3d3d54613b31ec3][gobject-ptr]

Here's a couple of handy functions for working with the generic
`gobject` interface I set up a few weeks ago (the same one that all of
these `gobject%` subclasses implement). `gobject-ptr` will extract a
`gtype-instance` pointer out of anything that implements
`prop:gobject`, and `gobject/c` is a contract similar to
`is-gtype?/c`, but accepts `gobject` values. I'll use these later to
have the `make-bus-channel` a little cleaner and able to operate on
any Bus derivative.

## [b92404cc4b71e6addf69f081995646a7d161e09b][gi-bitmask]

A couple of more helpers for working with GIR bitmasks. A bitmask is a
special case of `gi-enum`, and these functions just help me clarify
some contracts for working with them.

## [ef257cd9ccf67a85d9cebf86e95984f19b6b2fe2][place-dead-evt]

Some more refinements to working with GStreamer buses and
messages. When a bus channel gets an end of stream or error message,
it should close down. The internal implementation of these channels
utilize Racket [places][places]. A _place_ is something between a
thread, a CSP routine, and a fork of the Racket process. I don't want
it to utilize system resources when it's not being used, mostly
because I have no idea what system resources are being utilized when a
Place exists. The output of the place has been a message from the bus,
which I wrap and cast into the right kind of interface. But now I do a
`select` kind of operation to see if there's a message waiting or if
the place has closed down. The function to do this _select_ (that
terminology should be familiar to Golang fans) is called `choice-evt`,
and one of the choices is `place-dead-evt`. This is a Racket event that can
be synchronized when a place has terminated.

Now `make-bus-channel` returns a channel that has three kinds of
results when synchronized (with `sync`, naturally):

+ A `message` from the bus
+ `#f` (that's _false_) when there's a _NULL_ pointer (to be expected
  with the particulars of the underlying bus operation).
+ The `place-dead-evt`, which can be checked with `evt?`, for when the
  bus channel has closed down. Once the channel has closed, this will
  always be the synchronization result and doing a `sync` won't ever
  block.

One of these days I'll write a big blog post (or something) about
thinking in CSP across various languages (Clojure with core.async, my
limited understanding of Go routines, and Racket). It's a dope way of
managing concurrent operations. Would you be interested in something
like that?

With this week's contribution, I can now begin closing out the
`gstreamer` module with some final utility functions and structures
and a whole bunch of documentation. Feels like a good week!

🍂 Mark

[pipeline]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/708d000d47a170587698132f8e3bc6705743d5c1

[pipeline-compose]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/12b0b1150879f77db81931407ed7ee4e40dcdd87

[is-gtype]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/b1a4f8929ee6e8ec7b2ef42148d600647d952483

[bus]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/6d67c6fd2012a960af220c53c5c94cc4faf78c27

[gobject-ptr]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/1871749bee5035dbf43f751bf3d3d54613b31ec3

[gi-bitmask]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/b92404cc4b71e6addf69f081995646a7d161e09b

[place-dead-evt]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/ef257cd9ccf67a85d9cebf86e95984f19b6b2fe2

[places]: https://docs.racket-lang.org/guide/parallelism.html#%28part._effective-places%29
