---
title: The Programs of the Week We Put Our Face in the Phone
message_id: <owc3u6.1e1cdhfidwi2g@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Sep 11 - Sep 15
====================================

Yo dawgs. I heard you like GObjects. So I put GObjects in your objects
so you can Racket when you C.

I wrote a _bunch_ of stuff this week! I had a little mini-light bulb
moment and just started writing. Code, docs, all that stuff.

I think I've completed the documentation for
`ffi/unsafe/introspection`. It's been kind of painful writing this, as
I had to confront all the little flaws and inconsistencies in the
API. But the little light bulb moment I had, along with some more
mastery of Scribble led me to get over this hump. You can read the
documentation for this
module
[here](http://www.markwunsch.com/overscan/gobject-introspection.html).

Here are some highlights from the commits this week that led to this
final doc.

## [0ce0ad4ea996c0de8619e0bdade0988b976f2ed7][makefile]

I update my `Makefile` to run a slightly altered version of the `raco
scribble` command:

    raco scribble +m --html-tree 1 --redirect-main $(RACKET_DOCS) --dest-name $@ $<

This command now tells scribble to make a `html-tree` with a depth of
`1` - that is, instead of a single HTML document, make a directory
with one level of depth, and write it out to the destination directory
named `$@`; for those unversed in Makefile quirks that means the thing
on the left side of the `:` — the _target_, which in this case is
"docs".

## [3045ffa87c4eacce60c731a6da77b7137927ae4f][prop-gobject]

Here's the challenge: I want to bridge the GObject struct that I use
to represent instances with
the
[`racket/class`](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/mzlib_class.html) OOP
library. There are a lot of synergies that can be drawn from using the
latter. The question is how. After a bit of brooding and mulling, I
turn
to
[structure type properties](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/structprops.html). Like
`prop:cpointer` and `prop:procedure`, structure type properties are
things that allow a structure type to behave a certain way. They're a
bit like Interfaces (The concept. Not to be confused with,
uh,
[interfaces](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/createinterface.html)). Instances
of a struct type that implement a structure type property conform to
certain behaviors. Like how the `gi-function` struct type implements
the `prop:procedure` property and so returns `#t` to `procedure?`.

`make-struct-property` creates the `prop:gobject` structure type
property, as well as functions to act as a predicate (`gobject?`) and
retrieve the value of the property from the struct `gobject-ref`. The
value of `prop:gobject` should be a `gtype-instance` or a function
that accepts the struct and returns a `gtype-instance`. On the newly
renamed `gobject-instance` and the `gstruct` struct types, I implement
this prop with the function [`identity`][identity]. Now I can change a bunch of
contracts to accept `gobject?`. Any thing that implements the
`prop:gobject` property can be a GObject.

[identity]: https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/procedures.html#%28def._%28%28lib._racket%2Ffunction..rkt%29._identity%29%29

## [d98086b796311916f1d253459680a683a9282e2f][gobject%]

Now comes the bridge. First is `gobject<%>` (the `<%>` suffix is a convention for
a Racket interface). I create this with `interface*`; this form
allows me to attach structure type properties to the interface. I add
`prop:gobject` and look for a field on the object called `pointer` for
the value of the property. Now, every object that implements
`gobject<%>` can be used interchangeably with other gobjects. I also
create a base class that extends this interface, for convenience sake.

So the class `gobject%` extends `gobject<%>` with the property
`prop:gobject` so that instances will respond `#t` to `gobject?`.

I am gobsmacked by the gobs of gobjects!

## [d083b34e2bb5ce9c1ac19647b385ea8160a9d6b9][scribble]

Here's some cute Scribble tricks:

+ I pair `racketresult` with `racketinput` (and learn about `unsyntax`
  aka `@#,`) together to make something that looks like a REPL
  interaction.
+ The `procedure` function will make content "look" like a Racket
  procedure: it wraps it like `#<procedure:x>`.
+ `racketmodname` will automatically link a module path like
  `racket/class` to its documentation.

And there we have it. This feels like a good place to end this spike
of work on documentation and GObject Introspection and move on to
focusing on GStreamer specifically, using the new tools for OOP to
make the ergonomics of that module real good.

👺 Mark

[makefile]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/0ce0ad4ea996c0de8619e0bdade0988b976f2ed7

[prop-gobject]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/3045ffa87c4eacce60c731a6da77b7137927ae4f

[gobject%]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/d98086b796311916f1d253459680a683a9282e2f

[scribble]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/d083b34e2bb5ce9c1ac19647b385ea8160a9d6b9
