---
title: The Programs of the Week of the Oscars
message_id: <om93xj.1al5sook3fqmb@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Feb 27 - Mar 3
===================================

This week, I did something that I thought was pretty cool. I wrote
some **Racket** code that called into a **C** framework. I did it
through two different mechanisms.

## [baf315f2112bc5f7612086d2ae9e6f378af7542b][ffi]

In my first bit of true Racket code I've committed, I use
Racket's [Foreign Interface](http://docs.racket-lang.org/foreign/) to
load [`libgstreamer`](https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org) and run it
through a bit of a _Hello, World_ example.

In GStreamer's documentation, the first example they show is one to
print out the library version information, just to show that you've
successfully linked the library. Here's their C example:

    #include <stdio.h>
    #include <gst/gst.h>

    int
    main (int   argc,
          char *argv[])
    {
      const gchar *nano_str;
      guint major, minor, micro, nano;

      gst_init (&argc, &argv);

      gst_version (&major, &minor, &micro, &nano);

      if (nano == 1)
        nano_str = "(CVS)";
      else if (nano == 2)
        nano_str = "(Prerelease)";
      else
        nano_str = "";

      printf ("This program is linked against GStreamer %d.%d.%d %s\n",
              major, minor, micro, nano_str);

      return 0;
    }

In Racket, using `ffi/unsafe`, that becomes:

    (displayln
      (format "This program is linked against ~a" (gst_version_string)))

I run this and I see: "This program is linked against GStreamer
1.10.3". Eureka!

## [d4866be5c35e413d41a50891986dc47a4ce6a3b3][gir]

In this commit, the outcome is the same, but this time I'm using a
Racket GObject Introspection [library][racket-gir].

[GObject Introspection](https://wiki.gnome.org/Projects/GObjectIntrospection) is

> a middleware layer between C libraries (using GObject) and language
> bindings. The C library can be scanned at compile time and generate
> a metadata file, in addition to the actual native C library. Then at
> runtime, language bindings can read this metadata and automatically
> provide bindings to call into the C library.

So GObject Introspection provides a set of annotations for
GObject-infused C code that allows another language to easily create
bindings to that library. Those bindings are created by looking into a
GObject Introspection Repository, or *GIR* for short. GStreamer,
thankfully, is written with this convention. With a Racket GIR library
in hand, I don't have to write foreign function interfaces for every
function in GStreamer, and my *Hello, World* can lose a lot of
boilerplate.

## [573cd52b4636976b0cd606a140860229226c6d86][init_check]

With the new power of GIR, I initialize GStreamer by creating a
function, `initialize` that returns `#t` or `#f` (Racket's *true* or
*false*) depending on if initialization was successful.

I'm super stoked that this works and really glad to get my hands into
both Racket and C simultaneously, but I did hit a snag. The
Racket [gir](https://github.com/Kalimehtar/gir) library hasn't been
updated in nearly a year, and it seems to do some incorrect things
around methods that return C pointers and factory functions. That's
not going to work. My first spike into `overscan` is to simply get a
video to play through a GStreamer binding. In order to do that, I
either have to do tedious FFI bindings and ignore GIR entirely, or I
can write my own Racket bindings for GObject Introspection.

I think I'm going to have to do things the hard way.

Yours in λ,<br />
Mark


[ffi]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/baf315f2112bc5f7612086d2ae9e6f378af7542b

[gir]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/d4866be5c35e413d41a50891986dc47a4ce6a3b3

[racket-gir]: http://docs.racket-lang.org/gir/index.html

[init_check]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/573cd52b4636976b0cd606a140860229226c6d86
