---
title: The Programs of a Week of Scribbling
message_id: <ot3fae.23saipsomi8bu@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: July 10 - July 14
======================================

Last week, I said I wanted to focus in on two areas:

> + Start making the `gstreamer` module something with actual utility.
> + Documentation with Scribble.

This week, I did some spikes into doing those very things, and
encountered more friction than I anticipated.

## [f6c517e38794e9b16baf81afe4b4bac4b4112ac5][ffi-lib]

I write a new function: `(gi-repository->ffi-lib repo)`

This function takes a `repo` (which the contract asserts must be a
`gi-repository`) and returns
an [`ffi-lib`][loading-foreign-libs]. This creates a symmetry between
Racket's Foreign Interface functions and GObject Introspection. This
function allows me to take an introspected Repository (like that
returned when I call `(introspection 'Gst)`), and instead of using the
introspected bindings, use it just like any other foreign library. I
do this through the use of the C function
`g_irepository_get_shared_library`, which is renamed to be more
Racket-like in this code. Given a GIR namespace, this will return a
path to the `.so` or `.dylib` or `.dll` that defines it. I can then
load this as I would any other C library using Racket's FFI mechanims.

This is especially helpful for a C function
like [`gst_element_link_many`][element-link-many]. This function is
not actually provided to GObject Introspection. But now I can actually
load this function through plain old FFI. Feels like a good thing to
keep in the back pocket when I need to step out from the GIR
indirection.

## [d1161aa4deb01bcc21d2f7f4be1980b6c9d4e34f][element-rkt]

Here I extract out GStreamer elements into their own module:
`element.rkt`. This is just a stub to start, and the intention is to
"start making the `gstreamer` module something with actual utility."
I'm not quite sure of what form that ought to take, and the
aforementioned `ffi-lib` support was a stab in a direction. I decided
to mull over this a bit more and switch to focusing in on
documentation.

## Scribble

[Scribble](https://docs.racket-lang.org/scribble/) is the name of
Racket's Documentation tool. To save you a click:

> Scribble is a collection of tools for creating prose
> documents—papers, books, library documentation, etc.—in HTML or PDF
> (via Latex) form. More generally, Scribble helps you write programs
> that are rich in textual content, whether the content is prose to be
> typeset or any other form of text to be generated programmatically.

Scribble is a fascinating expression of Racket's power in creating
domain specific languages. Every bit of Racket documentation you see
was generated by Scribble. You might remember last week's haphazard
explorations in LaTeX. Now it all comes full circle. Scribble has
piqued my curiosity since my interest in Racket first began (see the
work of Matthew Butterick
and [Pollen](http://docs.racket-lang.org/pollen/)). This week I took
my first earnest steps in using Scribble to document Overscan.

I found it difficult.

Scribble is effectively a new language. Yeah there's Racket in there,
but the conventions for calling into it as well as the available
functions require an additional learning curve. I had a hell of a time
learning about the interactions between Racket package
management, [`raco setup`][raco-setup], and package
documentation. Thankfully, the folks in the `#racket` freenode channel
were more than happy to answer my questions.

First of all, I had to reorganize my docs. Overscan is
a [_multi-collection package_][multi-collection] and the `scribblings`
field in package metadata is only well-understood with
single-collection packages. Something like that… I read this in the
Racket documentation somewhere and now can't find it. Your average
Racket installation generates documentation in two different places: a
"main" installation directory and a "user-specific" directory. On my
Mac that means I can find documentation in `/Applications/Racket
v6.9/doc` _and_ in `~/Library/Racket/6.9/doc`. This was _so_ confusing
to me but I finally managed to get most of my documentation process
squared away.

To build my documentation and put it in the right place I run:

    raco setup --doc-index --pkgs overscan

My writing process means I write a bit, save it, load it, and view it
in a browser. I want to do this quickly. It occurred to me that it's
been a while since I looked at the landscape of _do something when the
filesystem changes_ utilities and it's real out in these
streets.

I decided to download and use [`entr(1)`](http://entrproject.org/) to
do what I needed to do:

    find overscan/scribblings -name *.scrbl | entr -d raco setup --doc-index --pkgs overscan

I run this command and now `entr` is waiting for changes from the list
of Scribble files piped in and will run my `raco setup` command
whenever something changes.

Here's what I sorted out this week w.r.t. Scribble:

+ Where to put the `scribblings` directive in an `info.rkt`.
+ What a `'multi-page` Scribble document looks like.
+ The difference between the _main_ and _user-specific_ directories
  vis-à-vis where documentation is accessed from.
+ `raco docs` does not work in the current version of MacOS. This is a
  known issue and should be fixed in the forthcoming Racket v6.10.
+ A productive process for compiling and viewing scribble documents as
  the code changes.
+ The Scribble functions: `@table-of-contents`, `@include-section` and
  `@margin-note`.

Special thanks to Alexis King
(aka [lexi-lambda](https://lexi-lambda.github.io)) for being a good
sport about answering my questions in `#racket` and for writing the
great [Megaparsack](http://docs.racket-lang.org/megaparsack/)
documentation, which has been a great example to follow.

Next week I plan on writing some in-depth documentation and will
hopefully figure out how to build said documentation at regular
intervals and host them on the Web.

– Mark


[ffi-lib]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/f6c517e38794e9b16baf81afe4b4bac4b4112ac5

[loading-foreign-libs]: https://docs.racket-lang.org/foreign/Loading_Foreign_Libraries.html

[element-link-many]: https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/data/doc/gstreamer/head/gstreamer/html/GstElement.html#gst-element-link-many

[element-rkt]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/d1161aa4deb01bcc21d2f7f4be1980b6c9d4e34f

[raco-setup]: https://docs.racket-lang.org/raco/setup.html

[multi-collection]: https://docs.racket-lang.org/pkg/Package_Concepts.html#%28part._concept~3amulti-collection%29
