---
title: The Programs of the Week of Labor Day
message_id: <ovzsw1.1u680x7pnxaep@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Sep 4 - Sep 8
==================================

Going to keep this week v brief. I took last week and Labor Day off
from writing code, and jumped in for a few tiny but important
commits.

## [8d15b54ca31fb54c70755e4bb47078e3d8064c0d][contracts]

I write some contracts within the `twitch` module. These better define
what is happening. The `twitch-stream-key` is a parameter that should
be a string. The `twitch-sink` function accepts a `boolean?` with the
`#:test` keyword and returns a GObject that `is-a?` GStreamer
Element.

This is a small commit, but something that has me kind of stuck on
this project is trying to understand how best to represent these
different abstractions in Racket. Part of what helps me think through
how the API should be shaped are Racket contracts. Which is
unsurprising, considering how working within a statically typed system
helps guide thinking (this is a no-dogma zone plz). As I'm shaping
this code I'm thinking "well what would be better is, instead of
saying this function returns something that `is-a?/c element%`, if it
said something like `gst-sink?`. A small distinction, but one that
helps guide the usage.

## [688ab2f5f09178169b1d7fe99b9926662368f748][sink]

This commit does just that. It defines two functions `sink?` and
`src?` which return if a GStreamer element is a sink element (it
consumes data) or a source element (it produces data).

What's becoming clear to me as I'm writing this code and its
documentation is that within the `gstreamer` module I'll need to
translate between the GObject interface and the `racket/class`
interface. I made them _look_ the same, but they serve different
purposes with respect to user ergonomics.

The work continues.

– Mark

[contracts]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/8d15b54ca31fb54c70755e4bb47078e3d8064c0d

[sink]: https://github.com/mwunsch/overscan/commit/688ab2f5f09178169b1d7fe99b9926662368f748
