---
title: The Programs of the Week of the Big Game
message_id: <p3jxpz.1ps3nwyagt7se@markwunsch.com>
---

This Week's Program: Jan 29 - Feb 2
===================================

It's been another couple of weeks since my last Tinyletter. I decided
to shelve Overscan's ongoing `gui` work/debacle/obsession and get back
to basics. I have enough pieces in place to get _something_ to work,
and an open thread on the Racket dev mailing list to try to better
understand some odd behavior on the things that aren't working.

This week I mostly focused on doing the best thing to recharge energy
on a project: write documentation. Overscan's `gstreamer` module has
evolved and quite a bit has been added since I started down this GUI
path, so I took some time to write out docs for that new
functionality. Writing documentation is like pruning a bonsai:
tranquil, meditative work that doesn't madden you with subtle platform
implementation differences.

The other thing I've spent time on over the past couple of weeks is
[`mechwarper`](https://github.com/mwunsch/mechwarper), my repository
hosting [**Ansible**](https://www.ansible.com) playbooks for the care
and feeding of my computer machines.

Recently, the release of [Ruby 2.5.0][ruby-25] meant it was time to do
a bit of house cleaning on my MacBook.  I also decided to upgrade to
High Sierra. It made me realize I never want to think about bespoke
installations of software again. I want every Mac I interact with to
basically run the same suite. I turned to Ansible to figure out how to
manage the bootstrapping of a new Mac development machine.

## [`local.yml`][local]

The main playbook is located at `local/local.yml` and is split into
several roles. The `basics` role installs Homebrew, Homebrew-Cask, the
[Mac App Store CLI](https://github.com/mas-cli/mas), Git, [GNU
Stow](https://www.gnu.org/software/stow/), and my
[Dotfiles](https://github.com/mwunsch/dotfiles). From there, there are
roles to install Homebrew formula I use frequently, some Mac apps
installed through Cask (including Racket), and apps from the Mac App
Store. I also have roles for setting up a Ruby installation with
`rbenv`, [getting my Emacs set up just the way I like
it][emacs-setup], and for installing the GStreamer components that I
use frequently with Overscan.

Of all the roles that I use here, the one I'm most proud of is the
`aesthetics` role.

[emacs-setup]: https://www.jwz.org/blog/2016/09/searching-for-finally-got-my-emacs-setup-just-how-i-like-it-yields-excellent-results/

## [`aesthetics`][aesthetics]

This is a role to make my Mac _look and feel_ like I want it to.

Like, for instance, pulling out the SF Mono font out of embedded
applications into the system font library:

    # https://simonfredsted.com/1438
    - name: SF Mono font availability
      copy:
        src: "{{ item }}"
        dest: ~/Library/Fonts/
      with_fileglob:
        - "/Applications/Utilities/Terminal.app/Contents/Resources/Fonts/SFMono*.otf"
      tags:
        - font

But the pièce de résistance of this role is the little hack to map the
Caps Lock key to Control, which is the most important thing a
developer can do for their productivity.

The first thing is to fetch information about the hardware from the
system:

    - name: Apple Internal Keyboard vendor/product id
      shell: |
        set -e
        tmpfile=$(mktemp)
        ioreg -c AppleHSSPIDevice -r -d 1 -a > $tmpfile
        vendor_id=$(/usr/libexec/PlistBuddy -c 'Print :0:idVendor' $tmpfile)
        product_id=$(/usr/libexec/PlistBuddy -c 'Print :0:idProduct' $tmpfile)
        echo $vendor_id-$product_id-0
      register: keyboard_id
      changed_when: false
      check_mode: no
      ignore_errors: true
      tags:
        - keyboard

This will pull out a vendor and product id for an internal MacBook
keyboard. It does not work with USB or Bluetooth keyboards. Look at
this shell script! `mktemp`, `ioreg`, `PlistBuddy` — the gang's all
here! Next, I set some preferences using `defaults`:

    - name: Caps-Lock -> Ctrl mapping
      shell: |
        set -e
        key='com.apple.keyboard.modifiermapping.{{ keyboard_id.stdout }}'
        found=$(defaults -currentHost find $key)
        if [[ $found =~ ^Found ]]; then
          echo $found
          exit 0
        else
          defaults -currentHost write -globalDomain $key -array \
          '<dict><key>HIDKeyboardModifierMappingDst</key><integer>30064771300</integer><key>HIDKeyboardModifierMappingSrc</key><integer>30064771129</integer></dict>'
        fi
      register: result
      changed_when: result.stdout == ''
      when: keyboard_id.rc == 0
      tags:
        - keyboard

This is [Incantation TN2450][tn2450] to tell Apple that one key on your keyboard is
actually another key. Preferences are heavily cached, so give it a
minute.

Feel free to check out Mechwarper and give it a run, but only if you
want your Mac to behave just like my Mac. There's a bunch more to do
to get a machine fully operational, and I expect I'll be adding those
steps over time. Ansible makes this so easy!

For further reference check out some of these projects that served as
inspiration:

+ [`fgimian/macbuild`](https://github.com/fgimian/macbuild)
+ [`geerlingguy/mac-dev-playbook`](https://github.com/geerlingguy/mac-dev-playbook)
+ [`osxc/starter`](https://github.com/osxc/starter)

Have a great weekend!

– Mark

[ruby-25]: https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/news/2017/12/25/ruby-2-5-0-released/

[local]: https://github.com/mwunsch/mechwarper/blob/master/local/local.yml

[aesthetics]: https://github.com/mwunsch/mechwarper/blob/master/local/roles/aesthetics/tasks/main.yml

[tn2450]: https://developer.apple.com/library/content/technotes/tn2450/_index.html
