---
title: Emacs
tags: emacs
---

After an extended *getting-to-know-you* period and a lot of false
starts, I am now using Emacs as my preferred text editor. I came from
Vim. I accept that I will be branded as a heretic by some. I accept
that I will be branded as a Johnny-come-lately by others. I accept
that there are those that will just look at me and think, "Oh great
another neck-bearded eccentric weirdo." To all I say, "YOLO."

To say that I am now using Emacs as my "preferred text editor" is
dancing around the edge of truth. Really, I am using Emacs as my
preferred base of operations, from which anything and everything could
begin including text editing. There's lots of old variations on an old
joke about Emacs being an operating system and oh! how it makes us
chuckle. It's true. The joke is truth.

I moved away from Vim because I was always context switching. `^Z`ing
my way to command line tools and `fg`ing back. Copying text into a
special register so that I could `pbpaste` it through some
pipeline. The plurality of Unix is admirable and beautiful but I want
it right there with me in the pocket of my editor ready for my flow
state to embrace. Extend Vim? I'd rather not I mean have you seen
VimL? Yes there's [Neovim][neovim] and that seems like a really
promising project. But... but I've *seen* things. I've seen
[things][emacslive] people do with Emacs that is impressive. People I
respect use Emacs. And of course, there's the Lisp.

Oh the Lisp. The [Parenthesis][paredit]. The [REPLs][cider]. It's all
here and it's all fantastic and it's so powerful to treat the text
you're editing as a living breathing abstract syntax tree. Glorious
Lisp. It was Clojure that really brought me to Emacs.

Clojure and [Evil][evil]. If I ever miss the editing productivity of
Vim, I can put it inside of Emacs.

You can find my Emacs preferences and customizations here:
https://github.com/mwunsch/emacs.d

In that repository's README I've outlined my process for learning
Emacs. Some special shoutouts tho:

+ Mickey Peteresen's [*Mastering Emacs*][mastering] is a fantastic
  resource. Read the website and buy the ebook.
+ I rely on [Projectile][projectile] day-to-day.
+ [Magit][magit] can be a better git than git.

I do not encourage anyone to take up Emacs. There are much more
sensible choices. But if you do decide to take up the challenge, you
will be rewarded with productivity, concerned looks from your
colleagues, and a staggering amount of credibility.

[neovim]: https://neovim.io/

[emacslive]: https://github.com/overtone/emacs-live/

[paredit]: http://danmidwood.com/content/2014/11/21/animated-paredit.html

[cider]: https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider

[evil]: http://emacswiki.org/emacs/Evil

[mastering]: https://www.masteringemacs.org/

[projectile]: https://github.com/bbatsov/projectile

[magit]: http://magit.vc/
